I think it's very clear you know that um
Harvard kept harping on me over and over
again about the idea that well we only
use race to help you not to hurt you
it's a zero-sum game so you know a
penalty for one group is equivalent to a
bump for the other group you know we
could always write it write it that way
and um you know I think Robert sort of
summed up the decision well by by saying
the solution to eliminating
discriminations to eliminate all of it
[Music]
foreign
hello everyone watching and listening
today I'm speaking with Professor
researcher and econometrician Peter
arcidiocono
we discussed the recent Landmark
decision
by the Supreme Court to end race-based
affirmative action
how Peter's research was instrumental in
that outcome why Merit
has repeatedly proven to be the best
indicator of success and what Merit is
by the way
how compassion is used to cloak racial
discrimination and what might actually
yield results in service to the
under-resourced communities across the
United States so Peter let's start with
this um
the affirmative action has been in the
news a lot well for a long time but
particularly in recent weeks given the
new Supreme Court decision I think we
should first of all uh alert everybody
watching and listening to who you are
and why people should
consider you a valid source of
information and um and and what you do
so fill us in about who you are and what
you do and why this is a topic of
interest to you
so you know I'm an economics professor
who studies affirmative action and
higher education and sort of as a result
of that got the opportunity to be an
expert witness in the two students or
Fair admissions cases that were recently
decided decided in the Supreme Court one
with Harvard and one with UNC
and I took the cases in part because
you know for someone who studies
affirmative action
um we've never had the data to really
look at it well
universities typically hide their data
probably as a result of these lawsuits
um so you know there's a large gap in
racial preferences between it being a
tiebreaker and being what somebody like
a Braum candy might be in favor of of
equal outcomes
so understand exactly how big the
preferences are to me would move us in a
direction thinking about optimal policy
now as it stands you know the way the
rulings went uh we're we're not supposed
to have affirmative action I think
universities are probably going to look
for ways to get around that
but the thrill was the ability to
actually see Harvard's admissions files
you know I got to actually see their
full database across six years I got to
look at the actual applications
themselves look at the reader comments
for a subset of these things you know
all the alumni interviews
it was an amazing experience a
frightening experience but an amazing
experience uh to be able to see all that
okay so let's let's start with two
things why don't you outline the cases
for us you said there were two cases and
then maybe you could step people through
the typical admissions process at let's
say at Harvard and the UNS and UNC
that's going to be similar for many
universities but everybody watching and
listening needs to know how universities
uh do how they claim they admit how they
actually admit and how they should admit
those are three obviously separate
questions but let's start with what
exactly why exactly were these
universities in court to begin with
so there's actually two different
reasons
on the Harvard side it had a lot to do
with Asian discrimination
we think about affirmative action and it
really is uh designed to help
African-American students and somewhat
Hispanic students
but
um Asian Americans is a population of
doing incredibly well academically and
also in other areas and so Harvard was a
good place to look at the ancient
discrimination side side of things
so in the Harvard case he had both Asian
discrimination you also had our racial
preferences narrowly tailored you know
how big are these racial preferences at
Harvard so those are sort of my two
parts of the case there was another
expert uh uh Rick kallenberg who covers
um race neutral Alternatives because
that's the other thing the Supreme Court
has said is you're supposed to look for
ways to get diversity without using race
explicitly
on the UNC side we didn't have the Asian
discrimination claim
it was more on you know how large the
racial preferences coupled with these
race neutral alternatives
but then there's another aspect too
which if you look back at the two
Michigan Supreme Court cases
the one on the undergraduate side said
you cannot use a formula
but on the law school sides you can't
use racist part of a formula but on the
law school side you could you could take
into account holistically
I mean as an economist and I'm sure for
you too uh if I just hide part of the
formula now I'm holistic you know so the
question is you know how how formulaic
were the admissions and you know my
models could predict UNC admissions
incredibly well
so that would also sort of speak to you
know what does it mean if we don't write
down the formula is it okay you know but
um
you don't if you don't write down the
formula
and yet you couldn't derive an equation
from analyzing the outcome all that
means is that the admission process is
random not that seems I mean you could
go to a random admission process right
you could let every hammer in and then
you could fail everybody who doesn't do
well in the first two years and let it
and the survivors flourish and
I mean you could make a case for that
it's somewhat inefficient because all
those people who fail have to go there
and fail and that's not necessarily so
easy on them but there are certain
advantages to that because there will be
surprising successes as well
um that isn't generally the direction
that we've chosen to go and then if you
do have a more rigorous policy so that
would be one you could hypothetically
model well then in principle
in fact this is actually by law as far
as I understand the law is that my
understanding of the law with regards to
hiring and selection at least and I
don't know if that pertains to academic
admissions is that you have to use you
are required by law to use the most
valuable valid and reliable current
means of evaluation available
um that don't produce
counterproductive and illegal racial
differences and so and no one knows how
to do that because
well because no one knows how to do that
it isn't obvious how you can do both
simultaneous in fact it doesn't look to
me like you can and that's a major
conundrum so okay so back to you to back
to UNC so you modeled their equations
and you did the same thing for Harvard
and you found and you you phrased it in
these terms too
is that for every advantage that's given
to One race let's say or one category
there's going to be a commensurate
disadvantage
um applied to another and that's
particularly egregious in the cases of
Harvard and and also I believe the UNC
that's particularly egregious in
relationship to Asians and and how big
are the advantages and and what do you
think they signify
oh I think the advantages are enormous
you know uh I went in a lot more
optimistic about holistic admissions
than I came out you know to me it really
looks like we give very large
preferences across the board it's not
just on Race but also on legacies
whether you're gonna be on the whether
you're gonna be on the sailing team you
know right right Legacy Athletics and
race anything else oh so they also have
children and donors which um and
children and faculty and staff those the
last group isn't that big but the
children writers right it seems sort of
odd because they're supposed to have
like need blind admissions but then
there's a special list where we have uh
children and potential donors
um okay so so let me dive into that
momentarily so I spent a lot of time
delving into the selection literature
and by a lot of time I mean like 15
years I mean a lot of time we developed
selection tests for for corporations and
for academic institutions and so like I
knew the literature and one of my
students did an excellent PhD on
selection mechanisms in general and
developed an entire battery for
selecting students but and we looked at
this initially I was an ignorant
Canadian I didn't know this was a
politically charged domain I was curious
about something very very practical
which was well are there efficient ways
of selecting the best candidates for
different positions academic creative
managerial and the answer to that is
well yes and they're very well
documented and they're relatively
objective and so I started looking at
the data on objective testing
personality and also cognitive let's say
there are other you can measure interest
you can measure creative ability there
are other objective ways of getting at
this and then I looked at the history of
objective testing and I learned that it
was the Socialists that brought IQ tests
to the UK and then they spread from
there into the rest of the western world
and the re the reason for that and the
Army did this as well the reason for
that was that the hypothesis was that if
you used objective tests that you could
identify people of disadvantaged
economic background who had the ability
to succeed academically and
professionally and that would be good
for them and fair but it would also be
good for everyone else because why the
hell not draw on the full talent pool if
you're trying to move people along the
educational
um
uh ladder off the education ladder and
so my conclusion from all this and this
is before all this became politicized
was that there was absolutely no better
way of serving disadvantaged communities
than to stick 100 to objective tests not
because they didn't produce differential
outcomes because they still do but
because any other system you could
possibly produce would produce much
worse outcomes and then I read Adrian
Wooldridge as well you know and Adrian
who did it he said he was an economist
journalist for years a very very careful
historical researcher he showed very
clearly as far as I'm concerned that the
Alternatives the historical alternatives
to objective testing have been
Dynasty and nepotism
not equality of outcome so the prob the
thing about objective tests to me is
well first of all they actually predict
they're reliable and valid they're
better than any other method by a large
margin and and this is the crucial and
there's no way that you can do better
than that everything else you do will be
worse okay so now we have this mishmash
at universities that you just pointed
out if you're a child of a faculty
member you get preferential access
that's usually a hiring perk for the
faculty members an amazing one right and
it keeps it keeps them at private
schools because right State School can't
do that but the private Elite schools
can do that right right so you can see
what the rationale is there and then
um children of donors well you can also
understand the rationale there but
basically what that means is that rich
people can buy preferential access now
you could argue that that's acceptable
if one of the things that the rich
people are doing is donating like 100
million dollars to establish an entire
new research complex you could say well
perhaps that's a price worth paying it's
not fair at the admissions level and
then well the next one is Athletics and
you know I worked for the U.S Naval
Academy for a while uh that's a whole
story in and of itself and I found there
and this was quite shocking to me as
again as an ignorant Canadian that they
had a walloping preference for athletic
ability at the Naval Academy and that
struck me as you know pretty damn
counterproductive given what they were
training these people to do
um and then you also mentioned racial
preference and so there's a variety of
ways that these admission systems get
gerrymandered
do you see a solution that's even
possible you know holistic I think
that's just complete bloody rubbish
that's just hidden prejudice and
discrimination do you see an alternative
to
the catastrophe of objective evaluation
because it's also a catastrophe well
there's a clear alternative but we won't
be pursued you know basically every
other system has test based admissions
and I think the key to pushing on four
more for test-based admissions is
exactly what you said we think about the
tests as favoring the rich
but the other stuff favors zurich's even
more well right that's exactly it yeah
you think the Athletics you know Harvard
actually offers more Varsity Sports than
any school in the country
you know when we think about sports as
being an equalizer you're thinking about
football and basketball
we're talking about sailing that's an
entirely different matter so if you get
rid of racial uh of athletic preferences
whites go down African-Americans stay
the same and Asian Americans Hispanics
go up I'm sure that if you took football
and basketball out of that it'd be only
whites who are going down
um and that fits in you know because
Harvard also has an athletic rating as
part of their admissions criteria Beyond
just the athletic preference so
everybody gets an athletic rating
and the people who do the best on
Harvard's athletic rating are white
Legacies
then legacies of other races then white
non-legacies
you know how does that work one it's the
sports that Harvard offers like sailing
and such
but Sports actually favors
um people who go to small private
schools so I went to Suburban public
school no way could I make the soccer
team
my kids they made the soccer team at
their school
because they don't cut anybody
you know those types of things are all
work to favor people people of needs
yeah well this is the thing that that's
why I want to reiterate that for for
people who are watching and listening
like if you use an objective selection
system that's based on Merit so let's
Define merit first you tell me if I you
think I've got this wrong so here's the
definition of Merit all right so in
principle the Enterprise you're pursuing
has an outcome so at University the
outcome would be grades and graduation
if you go to work the outcome would be
job performance and that can be
evaluated a variety of ways if you're an
entrepreneur it would be success at
business and so that's the outcome now
Merit in relationship to that outcome
would be the documented relationship
between a trait that you might have and
that outcome and so one of the things
you see on the academic front is that
one of the biggest predictors of
academic success is
General cognitive ability and the reason
for that is
in part because there's actually no
difference between General cognitive
ability and academic success right
they're the same thing now it turns out
you can measure General cognitive
ability in with Incredible rapidity very
accurately and they are the most
accurate
tests ever designed by social scientists
they're much more powerful than almost
every medical test that we use and
they're very predictive not only of
academic performance as evidenced by
grades but also then long-term life
performance and they're even more
predictive of speed of learning and
again that's because General cognitive
ability and speed of learning are the
same thing so
you know there is a debate about our
society whether or not Merit is in
itself a let's say a racist and
prejudicial construction but that's
that's an idiot presumption because
that's the same statement as what any
Enterprise is for is not relevant and
that's completely Preposterous because
an Enterprise exists because it's for
whatever it does that's its
justification so you can't get anywhere
by claiming there's no such thing as
Merit and you actually can't get
anywhere by claiming we can't measure
Merit because if you accept that that
means we'd have to throw out all of
medicine and the social sciences because
we can actually measure Merit better
than we can measure anything else and
then you add to that
if you don't measure Merit
whatever you measure is going to
disadvantage the disadvantaged people
even more and that's the crucial issue
as far as I'm concerned because it will
revert to these invisible forms of
prejudice that are always associated
with nepotism and Dynasty so do you
think I have any of that wrong
so I'm in total agreement with you I
think the point of contention that the
universities would say is that their
objective function is different
they want to create the Future Leaders
of society and maybe that connects all
with the cognitive ability but they're
so vague about what
um the objective function is that
actually getting pinning them down on
that and being able to actually measure
is tough I also know the leadership
literature okay fundamentally it's
rubbish and the reason for that is that
first of all there isn't any such thing
as leadership like it's not a unitary
phenomenon and it's partly because
there are different ways of leading
people and different circumstances call
for different
say styles of leadership or different
abilities now having said all that you
can say that in general people who are
highly intelligent who are conscientious
which means they'll do what they say
they'll do and they stick to the task
and who are somewhat extroverted tend to
tilt more towards being approved of
leaders because
while they can figure out how to do
things they'll actually do them and they
can communicate about them
enthusiastically but if you take that as
a base definition of leadership you're
still going to find out that con that
General cognitive ability and
conscientiousness predict that and that
is also the same two sets of traits that
predict success at universities so all
that gerrymandering by the universities
that hand waving about the notion that
they can't measure their outcomes is
that like that's
that either means they don't know
anything about how to measure or that
they're just obscuring the situation
to their own
for their own purposes whatever they
might be well and that's the thing that
drives me most crazy about universities
is their unwillingness to use their data
you know if you take covid as a perfect
example of this
Notre Dame had a very different coveted
policy than the Ivy League schools
we should know
how that worked out we should know how
the mental health rates were different
across those things and then so we know
how to do it better in the future we
don't do that
um and you know the other thing it's
just I find hilarious is that a lot of
universities have randomized roommates
that's great for the purposes of
studying what uh the effect of different
roommate characteristics have on you and
and what the max component might look
like
but they don't do that they just keep
having the randomized roommates they
don't actually look to see what pairs
might actually work and how could we
construct policies that might actually
help their students well you know it's
really it's really it's really sad that
universities don't do that because
universities
spearhead the social sciences research
Enterprise and the fact that they don't
capitalize on their own expertise either
indicates that the expertise isn't there
or that it's untrustworthy or that there
are other reasons they don't bother
which is either you know incompetence or
some some hidden agenda and none of that
is excusable and so it's crazy
so let's go back to the to the court
case if you don't mind so what magnitude
of Advantage are we talking about with
regards to these different categories we
have Athletics we have Legacy students
we have
um racial preference that was that was
the main three categories apart from
children and faculties what what kind of
differential Advantage are you looking
at with regard say on the racial front
well so by far the biggest is the
athletic preference oh and then that's
the biggest one oh by far yeah and um
you know part of that you could think is
they negotiated ahead of time that
they're getting in so maybe you don't
see the full applicant pool for them but
the characteristics of admitted athletes
so I mean the the athletic admit rate is
you know over 85 percent
and the average athletic admits has
academic characteristics that are much
worse
then the average applicant to Harvard
and the average applicant to Harvard has
a very low chance of getting in so you
know we're really talking about massive
preferences there so so so
could you outline the advantages and
disadvantages to the athletic preference
because you could say well the the kids
who've been good athletes they are
Stellar at something so they've they
have a demonstrated track record of so
to speak track record of accomplishment
and I think there's something to that I
think you could infer although it would
be nice to prove that having developed
the ability to be a discipline
specialist in a sport might make you a
better team player and potentially a
better leader
um
I don't I don't know of any data
pertaining to that
um you might say as well that
for a school like Harvard that faces an
embarrassment of riches on the applicant
front that using additional criteria of
achievement is a useful screening
mechanism
um why does this athletic preference
exist now you said it favors the rich
too and that's a very interesting thing
to look at but why does the athletic
selection Advantage exist and what do
you think the pros and cons are
well I think it's a backdoor way in
Harvard's case of getting people from
Rich families and I say that primarily
because you know uh over 16 percent of
white uh admits
are recruited athletes that's actually
way bigger than what you see for
African-Americans Hispanics or or Asian
Americans and that's because you know
they're choosing Sports
like saline skein fencing all these
things that are associated more on the
the upper end
but I think you end up with the way you
know more University governance where
you end up with these handouts why why
isn't it the case why would you have an
athletic rating and not a music rating
you know it it's it's a very odd thing
to me that we have this tie
when you go to the restroom you always
close the door behind you right you
don't want a random passerby looking in
on you so why would you let people look
in on you when you go online your online
privacy is important that's why I use
expressvpn and you should too using the
internet without a VPN is like going to
the restroom without closing the door
how is that well your internet service
provider knows every single website you
visit they can sell this information to
ad companies and Tech Giants who then
use your data to Target you expressvpn
creates a secure encrypted tunnel
between your device and the internet so
your online activity can't be seen by
anyone it works on phones laptops even
routers so everyone who shares your
Wi-Fi is protected and all you have to
do is just fire up the expressvpn app
and click one button it's as easy as
closing the bathroom door get an extra
three months of expressvpn free by going
to expressvpn.com Jordan that's
expressvpn.com Jordan for three extra
months free Express vpn.com Jordan
[Music]
so so at places like Harvard they do
they do look at additional forms of
attainment and you'd know more about
this than me but I I used to know the
dean of admissions at Harvard and we
talked a lot and that he was a very
interesting character and you know they
do they basically pick kids who were at
that point that was back in the 90s they
picked kids who generally were Stellar
academically a lot of them were
valedictorians or or the next best thing
then generally they had to have at least
one other relatively Stellar talent and
that was sometimes Athletics but it was
it could be it could be Proficiency in
any number of other domains but you're
saying that the athletic preference far
outweighs any of the other criteria that
are applied that's right because they
don't even have like a field in the data
for these other things you know here we
have athletic you know we know you get a
score for that
the other things are going to matter it
might show up through your
extracurricular rating or things like
that
but you can see in the court record the
conversations that happen between
athletic coaches and the admissions in a
way that I don't think happens
in other other areas right so so
Athletics is considered separately from
extracurricular and everything else is
love that's right
that's right right yeah well you see
that also seems to be very careless you
know because you'd think if you were
going to set up an equation to admit
that you do some work in delineating
what other Stellar performance features
are actually associated with academic
success and and later even for your own
financial interest because I mean one of
the things the The Ivy Leagues are
trying to do is to pull people in who
will become rich enough to become alumni
donors and they're actually pretty good
at that and and they have the reasons
for it but you'd think that that would
be of sufficient economic interest to
actually try to to actually try to model
but I think even those athletic
preferences why they had that was not
um so pure emotive as that but more
relating to Jewish discrimination you
know I think that's part of why we have
the holistic missions in the first place
okay so that's another so you think not
only the Athletics admissions not only
privilege the rich but they're also way
of tilting the scales against Jewish
applicants
that's right and so then we have a oh
yeah that sort of uh carries forward to
today you know right and that but it
would be the Asians who are more in that
position now or is it still Asians and
Jews the thing is we wouldn't know about
Jews today and part of that is Harvard
actually doesn't download that
information so on the common application
it actually asks your religion
Harvard doesn't download that
information in part because of the
history of Jewish discrimination and I
think that's one of the remedies in this
these cases is don't download the racial
information that's not going to totally
get rid of discrimination they may still
discriminate against the Jews based on
their last name you know those kinds of
things
um but it's not as easy as being able to
point to the the Jewish box on that on
the application now on on the athletic
front again do you know if
so look one of the problems that place
like Harvard is that if you let students
in who aren't academically prepared
one of two things inevitably happens
um three things one is it's not that
much fun for the student
right I mean I saw when I was at Harvard
the consequences of being less
intellectually gifted than your peers
right and that and that's that's not fun
and especially many of the kids came
from places where they were pretty
stellar in their local environment and
then they'd come to a place like Harvard
which is hyper selected and they
wouldn't be so stellar and that was
salutary in some ways because it kept
ego down but it was devastating in other
ways and it's no fun to be selected to a
place like Harvard and then to fail and
if you're not selected on academic
grounds and that would be for General
cognitive ability and you come to a
place that's full of people who are
hyper-sophisticated cognitively that's
gonna be a pretty damn rough goal and
the probability that you're going to
fail is is quite high and be demoralized
and maybe even end up concluding that
you're stupider than you actually are
because it's such an artificial
competition at a hyper selected school
and then the other remedy of course is
that if you admit people whose General
cognitive ability isn't up to scratch
then you're going to decrease the
academic requirements because otherwise
everyone who's admitted who on these
somewhat fallacious grounds let's say
everyone's going to fail and then it's
going to look like your institution is
prejudiced
so that's right did the athletic do the
F do the athletes how did they do how do
the athletes do in terms of Dropout and
school Success
so unfortunately the lawsuit didn't give
us outcome data
but I will say I don't think dropout's
an issue I think Harvard always figures
out a way to graduate you in ways that
might not be true of other other
universities
what they graduate you in
you know you're not you're not going to
be getting a computer science degree uh
coming to that right right right and
that's what so you've been slotted it
you'd be slotted into one of the
disciplines that require
a somewhat lesser degree of sheer
intellectual horsepower that's right
that doesn't build off your previous
academic backgrounds and that's the
beauty of this right because I actually
think what's happened over time
is that the returns to your college
major matter more and more
and so now you have Fields where there's
very little demand for the subject
it having the athletic preferences those
other preferences for the people who
would really like to be an econ major
but
it's a ton of work given their
background then they end up switching
into this other fields whereas that same
person might have been an econ major at
uh a less prestigious
school they could have cut it there
right right right well that's the other
thing I think I I observed
both at the Harvard and at the
University of Toronto like if you have a
child
who could be a star at a state school
but was the third tier performer at an
Ivy League you're probably better off
sending them to the state school that
was my sense
because compared to the general
population
they might still be Stellar performers
but if you put them in with people who
are hyper selected especially when
they're young they're going to draw the
erroneous conclusion that they're not
particularly talented now compared to
you know people who are one in ten
thousand the person who's one in a
hundred isn't particularly Stellar but
compared to the other hundred they're
more than perfectly capable so I would
say to parents and I don't know what you
think about this I would say to parents
you know you should put your kid in a
place where they're going to be
challenged but where they're not at the
bottom of the pool
that's right and I think that that's
more relevant in some Majors than others
so the bottom of the pool I think is
sort of all relative to the Sorting that
happens within college and there's
massive sorting tons of people come in
wanting to major in the sciences and
such and then they switch out and it's
very predictable who switches out
um right relatively lower on the math
sides tend to yeah yeah yeah yeah well
that okay so so what up from what I've
been able to derive that's particularly
true it's like I think the the the the
discipline where General cognitive
ability horsepower is most necessary is
is physics and Mathematics
then there's a hierarchy down from that
and so
now I guess you could also make the case
is that well it's not so bad that in
universities there's a range of
disciplines to match different levels of
General cognitive ability but
I would still say that at Elite schools
that that have all those resources that
their resources are best
funneled towards those who are most able
to benefit from them and that's clearly
the people who have General higher
General cognitive ability
so and sort of related to that what also
bothers me is the they're not honest
with their students you know so if you
told somebody up front yes we're
admitting you
giving your
initial major interest in your test
scores and grades here's the probability
you're going to complete this degree
here's the problem right you're going to
complete some other degree here's
probably you drop out now at least
you've given them full information yeah
yeah to me it takes away a lot of the
mismatch argument because you know
individuals can make up their own own
mind at that point say well I'd rather
go to Harvard and graduate in uh some
non-science field then go to UNC and
graduate in physics
um if that's sort of the way the the
trade-off works yeah yeah well you could
argue You could argue that
you know there's going to be kids that
you don't think will do very well on the
basis of your testing who will go there
and actually do quite well
and so it would be okay not to inform
them because that way those exceptions
can flourish but I've thought this
through and this is my conclusion and
you can tell me what you think about
this which is that
yeah but for every kid like that you're
gonna do like eight kids to failure and
it seems like an inefficient use of that
kid's time and the school's resources to
have a failure rate that high to have
the odd exception I mean and I see this
if you're recruiting people for a
management position too you might say
well why not give this person a chance
you know maybe they'll succeed and the
answer is well
yeah but probably they won't and that's
going to be really hard on them and not
only that if they turn out not to be
able to do the job it's going to be
really hard on everyone that they're
supervising and working with and setting
someone up for failure from compassion
is not
advisable as a management strategy it's
a bad idea it's not it's not advisable
as an admission strategy as well
I totally agree I also like being able
to tell people
um look it doesn't look like you can cut
it because some of the people then can
respond
by working hard
for myself I was the guy who just
floated through
thinking I had it all together then I
got to graduate school and learned
humility and learned I had to work a lot
harder
um but having somebody tell me you know
you're not good enough
for myself that was actually uh a push
you know I wasn't internally motivated
enough I needed somebody to to prove
wrong uh in order to to do well now I
know I'm sort of weird in that way well
but uh yeah but but not but not not like
not absurdly weird in that way I mean
you see lots of smart kids who have
floated by who hit uh a wall where
they're now competing with kids who are
just as smart but like 10 times as
disciplined and some of them fail and
they're bitter as a consequence but some
of them like pull up their socks and
think oh my God looks like I'm actually
going to have to work and there's
nothing about that that isn't good for
them right because then not only then
they're more like Asians right because
the Asian Advantage I looked into the
Asian Advantage a lot and the Asian
Advantage by the way the Asian
performance advantage in the U.S
disappears by the third generation so it
turns out the more that Asian kids are
like American Kids the less they're like
Asians so to speak can Asians have this
hyper Focus like Jews I would say they
have this hyper focus on academic
success and academic success as a status
marker at home and in the community and
and and you know that is that's actually
I think something that in principle
might be remediable because it implies
that if you can teach people
at any given cognitive level to work
harder that is one Pathway to genuine
success but it's also appalling that the
Asians get discriminated against because
you know they the ones who are being
discriminated against they're hard
workers and that's not a good thing to
discriminate against being an American I
wanted my kid to do Sports you know that
was just part of the thing and he was
uninterested in sports and he kept
telling me that and he kept kept putting
him out there in soccer basketball
whatever and he kept saying I want to do
karate
um eventually did Karate it was fine
the kid was just different in that
regard
if if he'd been in a society where the
norm was to do something else to do
science I think you know that would have
been very nice for him socially and and
so on I understand he's in a place like
Hungary they're much more centered on
math
in America we're much more centered on
sports that Sports craze I think is
actually you know it does build some
good skills but I think it's uh we're
too obsessed obsessed with it to the
detriment of these other
these other things and I think Asian
American families have sort of figured
out
not to be obsessed about that but to be
obsessed about other things
the Bible is the root of all wisdom
inspiration and spiritual nourishment
the Hallow app empowers you to explore
the Bible's profound teachings and to
effortlessly incorporate them into your
daily life
a great place to start while you deepen
your understanding of the Bible is to
check out father Mike schmitz's Bible in
a year available on the Hallow app for
brief daily readings and Reflections
here you can dive into an extensive
library of Bible reading plans
accompanied by insightful Reflections
and audio guided meditations whether
you're a seasoned Bible reader or just
starting your journey hallow provides a
platform for you to engage with
scripture like never before
studying the Bible's literary Brilliance
has influenced countless writers poets
and artists throughout history by
studying the Bible yourself you'll gain
a deeper appreciation for the power of
Storytelling symbolism and metaphor
enriching your understanding of
literature across different genres the
Hallow app also helps you connect with a
community of like-minded individuals
sharing experiences insights and
encouragement along the path to
spiritual growth download the app for
free at hollow.com Jordan you can set
reminders and track your progress along
the way enrich your education and
nurture your mind and soul today
download the Hallow app at hallow.com
Jordan that's hallow.com Jordan
hello.com Jordan for an exclusive three
month free trial of all ten thousand
plus prayers and meditations
right which is another reason why it
would nice to be nice to see the
equations adjusted so that other forms
of Excellence extracurricular Excellence
are given their due weight right and so
so why were you called upon to testify
specifically
so I've written a lot of papers on
affirmative action and with mixed
results so I think that there's actually
a lot of pressure to say good things
about affirmative action and I didn't
always say good things and in fact uh in
2011 there was a protest over one of my
papers
um it was sort of uh I thought a very
innocuous paper
we actually use Duke data and
um we're looking at persistence in
science and economics
and what you could see is that
um you know African-American students
came in wanting to major in those
subjects at the same rates as white
students
but they were leaving at a much higher
rate so like over 50 percent of black
males who started in the sciences and
economics switched out
versus eight percent of white males
right
well the The Advocates of systemic
racism as an explanatory hypothesis
would say that the racism is so deep
that not only does it discriminate on
the
um admission side but it also
discriminates on the performance side
and so all those things disappeared as
soon as you control for academic
backgrounds you know you control for the
test scores you know other Duke ratings
and such you start off with these big
great racial gaps where Asian Americans
were most likely to persist in the
sciences and African-Americans release
likely once you've conditioned on
differences in academic backgrounds
driven both by affirmative action and
what you know the educational
experiences prior to college
that just disappears and I I think
did you control for grades or for SAT
scores or for both do you remember uh
can kill them for a whole different
specification said different controls
but it goes away fairly quickly
um and you could look at uh in suggest
performance in first year classes and
look at the yeah and that that wipes it
so for for everybody who's watching and
listening to make tell me if I get this
wrong so you could imagine that
if you're doing a statistical analysis
you could determine whether race was the
predictor or academic ability was the
predictor by modeling both of them and
seeing which predicted Dropout better
and if it's if if academic ability
destroys the ability of race to predict
Dropout but not the reverse then you
know it's academic ability and not race
and in principle unless you assume that
the academic ability markers are also
contaminated with
what would you call it systemic racism
then you eradicate the racist argument
so so what the you know what the
radicals do is they just say everything
systemic racism and it's virtually
impossible to mount an argument against
that but then we have the other problem
which for all of you who are
compassionate who are listening you know
it's not compassionate to put people
into situations where they
disproportionately fail
right it allows you to look good on the
admission front but it's not good for
the people who are involved as far as I
can tell do you think there's anything
about it that's good for the people that
are involved I I think it's tough you
know we could actually say more because
they ask the reason why you switched
your major
and one of them was the difficulty of
the courses or feeling not as prepared
for those courses and again you could
see that black students are much more
likely to say it was because of course
difficulty
and once you controlled for the SAT
scores and such that all went away
so really Point pointed towards
these academic measures really mattering
for your experience in those classes
now on that systemic racism front saying
well look the test scores are biased
to me I think that does such a
disservice because then it sort of says
what's happening to prior to college
like in the K-12 education it's really
not that bad because the test scores are
just misrepresenting it's you know uh
when in reality the fact that you know
one percent of black students score
above uh 1390 on the SAT
that's eight percent for whites and like
24 for Asian Americans
that's reflecting something that we
could fix that's what that's where we
need to spend our our time on is fixing
that okay so so let me let me make a
case for the for the universities and
what they're doing
so
what would rapidly happen if we went to
a purely objective evaluation system
is that at Elite level universities
there would be a disproportionate
compared to the population there would
be a radically disproportionate number
of Asians Jews
and a radically disproportionate dearth
of
of black Americans
that would happen very rapidly and the
universities are concerned about that
and now and and it's it's it's
definitely a very difficult not to crack
right and so
now it doesn't seem like the appropriate
solution to that is to disadvantage
extremely competent Asians
and I would say partly because well they
deserve their shot at the Target but
also you know there there aren't that
many hyper exceptional people on the
cognitive front right and if we're
greedy as a society and sensible in that
greed we would say we should set up our
institutions to capitalize on every
available bit of brain power and
persistence so it's better socially if
we can put the smartest people where
they have the greatest opportunities to
learn and contribute so we're not just
hurting the Asians let's say and the
Jews we're also depriving ourselves in
principle of what they could
offer but then we're going to have the
problem of of this disproportionate
racial
and ethnic mix in the universities and
so
what and and maybe this isn't a fair
question to ask you because it isn't
necessary that you have the solution to
this it isn't obvious to me that anyone
has but you were testifying on behalf of
you were making a case that the
Affirmative Action System says presently
constituted are
very badly flawed and probably illegally
flawed but
what do you see forward if anything as a
way out of this conundrum
so you know really I view it that I
wasn't actually saying it was flawed
someone just saying how big the
preferences are yeah I hate actually
being characterized as an opponent of
affirmative action because you're just
laying out biased I'm just trying to
show you what what the data show
to me I think it allows it works
affirmative action works as a Band-Aid
where it covers up all the inequities
that are happening prior to college and
then we don't focus on those things uh
Roland Friar I think has done a lot of
work on the no excuse Charter Schools
showing that those are actually pretty
effective at closing those achievement
gaps I think the work sort of shows it
doesn't translate as well into college
but it's a start
you know Unfortunately they ran him out
of town
um but uh you know he was uh you know
the most prominent black Economist there
came from nothing and and
you know what I think has happened to
him is absolutely horrible and he's one
of the few actually shows how to close
the equipment Gap
um right so and that was Roland Roland
Roland fryer
all right yes uh yes yes yes I've I've
been uh
seriously considering him inviting him
onto the podcast oh he is absolutely
amazing his story is amazing and what's
happened to him is yeah it's a criminal
shocking it's terrible yeah well so so
this this issue here I think you you
touched on something very crucial which
is that right if we pretend that the
achievement tests are the problem that
enables us to ignore the underlying
problems of course that gets muddy and
ugly very quickly too because one of the
things I would say perhaps as a I've
studied the development of anti-social
personality for example another
forms of Psychopathology that would
interfere with educational attainment
and lifetime attainment over the long
run and it's certainly the case for
example that fatherlessness is a
contributing factor in a major way right
unstable destabilized families and so if
you don't allow the achievement tests to
be the villain you have to look
elsewhere for the villains and that
becomes extraordinarily complex and
murky and Troublesome you know we tried
to prevent anti-social behavior for
example in in Quebec
and what we learned was that if children
are anti-social by the age of four most
of those kids would have been aggressive
at the age of two most aggressive kids
are socialized out of their aggression
by the age of four
if they're not socialized out of their
aggression by the age of four it doesn't
look like there's a damn thing you can
do about it afterwards or it's
extraordinarily difficult at least and
so that would mean you have to remediate
it at the age of two
but then if you start producing
government programs let's say to
remediate anti-social behavior before
the age of two you're in people's
households right it gets very invasive
right so some of these underlying
systemic problems let's say are
extraordinarily difficult to address
without falling into a kind of colonial
neocolonial overreach that's one way of
thinking about it and they're very
precise
because you know as soon as you would
propose something like that you'd be
accused of victim blaming you know but
the reality is this there's been some
great work done in other countries where
you go into a place like India and
they're talking to the mother there and
the mother's like so I should be talking
to my child
like that wasn't passed on to them that
they should be talking to their child
regularly that's not not judging you
that you didn't get that information
passed on we were saying how do we fix
this this problem I've I've I've also
been interested in precursors to
literacy you know and if you look at the
data you find that kids from literate
homes are exposed to books and a wider
range of vocabulary at a differential
rate that's staggering by the time the
kid is like two and a half you know and
it is the case that most poor families
if you interview poor mothers and
fathers and you ask them what they want
for their children and you put
educational achievement into the mix
they will indicate
in a fully committed manner that they
would like their children to be educated
but the problem is is they don't know
what the say the non-verbal precursors
are you know I had friends where I grew
up I grew up in this little place and
where the hell out in the middle of the
sticks there were no books in the house
like zero
right and that's way different than
growing up in an environment where like
my kids children at 18 months old
they're already dragging books around
behind them and sitting down and
pretending to read them right they have
all that literacy
pre-literate literacy skills are already
built in they value books they know what
they are they've made friends with them
they'll ask their parents to read the
books and you know in a in a family
that's very deprived and very poor
without a history of literacy nobody in
the family even knows that that's a
possibility that's right and it's such a
shame because I think there's now a way
of packaging that because well you've
revealed is you know the parents love
the kids they love them they want to do
right by them
but they're either under resourced or
don't know what those steps
are how do you if if it's presented more
that way maybe would get around the
victim blaming into something where you
could actually
help them
I worry about that because actually I
think one of the you know I used to be
think that affirmative action for
doctors that seems like the worst idea
to place to have affirmative action
but there is actually an argument for it
in that if you look at
um whether black patients will follow
the instructions given to them by a
white doctor versus a black doctor
they're more likely to actually follow
the instructions of a black doctor so
that actually makes the case there's two
ways to fix that problem one would be to
somehow rebuild the trust so that when
the white doctor gives the script they
they find it credible or the the short
run fix is to get more black doctors so
that we have people following following
the scripts somehow that trust
needs to be restored so we don't have
this well we're the white saviors coming
in and telling you how to parent your
child
the medical establishment has been
disregarding the lives of innocent
babies for decades now many have grown
cold and callous because of the surreal
thought The Surreal reality that over 64
million babies have been lost preborn
will not stand silent nor should we we
cannot stand by and let babies die at
the hands of abortion that's why
pre-born exists to stand up for those
who cannot defend themselves the only
defense for these precious babies is
their heartbeat which begins at just
three weeks and can be heard on
ultrasound by five weeks when a mother
making that ultimate Choice hears her
baby's heartbeat and sees the precious
life inside of her the majority of the
time she will choose Life by sponsoring
an ultrasound for a mother you are being
the voice of the pre-born please join
pre-born in the cause for life for just
28 dollars you can be the difference
between the life and death of a child
dial pound 250 and say the key word baby
or visit preborn.com Jordan all gifts
are tax deductible and and you will
never regret saving a child's life
that's pound 250 baby or visit
preborn.com Jordan
right while right right well you know I
also looked at the Head Start literature
for a long time because that was Head
Starts a very interesting program for
those of you who are watching and
listening it was part of the American
war on poverty that started in the early
1960s and it was actually a program that
was
optimistically viewed by conservatives
and liberals alike right and because
first of all you know who likes poverty
and the answer is nobody so everybody's
against poverty that has even an iota of
sense and so the Liberals were happy
because there were you know uh steps
being taken to remediate Poverty
hypothetically as a source and the
conservatives were happy because well
wouldn't it be better if you know poor
young people were educated so they could
pick themselves up by their bootstraps
and you know make their way in the world
and so everyone was hoping that Head
Start would be a success and
fundamentally it wasn't so and and
here's here's how it wasn't
the goal was the theory was that if you
got to kids early before school and you
gave them an academic boost that that
would not only catch them up to their
peers but it would give them the kind of
permanent advantage that would grow
across time right because now you're
prepared to go to school you can do
better in school and the advantages
would just accrue and that was a pretty
good theory but it turned out not to be
true because what happened and this has
been studied to death and there's no
doubt about this and people of every
political stripe analyze the data is
that the Head Start kids actually did do
better in grade one and two and three
their grades were higher they were more
likely to attend school and so on but
all the other kids caught up to them by
grade six
so the cognitive Advantage didn't accrue
and it didn't multiply in fact it
disappeared and now what Head Start did
do was more kids graduated who were Head
Start uh alumni and fewer got pregnant
in in teenage in the teenage years and
there were fewer criminals in the Head
Start groups and the reason for that
apparently was that
some children's environments were so
toxic that just taking them out of those
environments for some period of time
allowed them to be more socialized and
because they behaved yet better they had
better outcomes but there was no effect
whatsoever on cognitive performance and
that's very disenchanting eh because
that was a major league program and
people put a lot of time and effort to
it and there were every reason to hope
that there would be some gains on the
cognitive ability front that were
permanent but that didn't happen so I
thought the kids who went to the Head
Start kids who went to better schools
you did see it continue but maybe I'm
misremembering
it sort of continued to be like you
couldn't just
stop the investment there if if they
kept going on that track
that but I'm not an expert in that
literature I'm sure you know what's
better than me well Noel not necessarily
I don't know if I knew the the
differentiation at grade six between the
kids who you know went to better schools
and the kids who went to worst schools
what I did know was that overall the
cognitive advantages that had been
accrued disappeared it didn't have it
didn't seem to have a permanent effect
on IQ for example which was really
disheartening right because now I looked
into it even in more detail part of the
issue was you know Head Start was also
used as an employment program and so it
wasn't necessarily obvious that the kids
were actually learning anything at Head
Start they might have been being taken
care of reasonably well and it's also
very difficult to take a group of
three-year-olds
and teach them anything in an hour and a
half because there are three and you
know you have to
you have to give them juice and you have
to give them food and you have to stop
them from tearing each other into bits
and like yeah and then you have to be
trained enough to actually educate them
and so it isn't obvious that Head Start
was set up optimally as a cognitive
retraining program but but then it's
very expensive to set up an optimal
cognitive retraining program so that's
also a major league problem so so let's
go back to the let's go back to the
Judgment so what exactly did the Supreme
Court determine and what are the cons
what have the reactions of the
University's been and what are the
consequences of the decision so you know
the Supreme Court uh I mean there was
some sense of vindication because I
really felt like the lower court rulings
abused the statistical evidence
now I think the statistics played a role
in all this but you know
there are other aspects besides Justice
the statistical side
I think it's very clear you know that um
Harvard kept harping on me over and over
again about the idea that well we only
use race to help you not to hurt you uh
but it's a it's a zero-sum game so you
know a penalty for one group is
equivalent to a bump for the other group
you know we could always write it
write it that way
and um you know I think Robert sort of
summed up the decision well by by saying
the solution to eliminating
discrimination is to eliminate all of it
you know so you're not supposed to use
race directly in admissions now they
left this bit of a loophole in terms of
being able to talk about your
experiences the Prejudice and such
and I you know I think that could be a
good thing but if it just gets abused
the way I expected it might yeah it will
then yeah then we've got got a problem
yeah my my okay so they they they
eradicated
so they said straightforwardly that you
are not to use race as a determining
Factor that's right that's right race
can enter in only through your
experiences
um what that means for what college
admissions places actually do is going
to be uh interesting I mean I think what
what California did you know we had prop
16 prop 16 tried to put racial
preferences back in place
it got voted down in California by wide
margins despite Trump being on the
ballots
and the reaction of the UC system was
we're gonna no longer require the s.a.t
because we want to figure out a way you
know I think that the idea of a
university throwing away data
you know it's just beyond comprehension
you know it's to take the SAT for all of
its flaws is a pretty damn good test of
General cognitive ability and that's a
great predictor of the potential for
academic success and it's also an
equalizer across schools which is
crucial right when you're trying to
contrast rich kids from Great Schools
with poor kids from dismal schools you
know at least the poor kids from the
Dismal school with a great sat can get
into University and likely succeed you
throw that out man what are you left
with you're left with these I don't know
how they entered criteria yeah I don't
know how the UC admissions could
possibly make decisions you know like if
you're going to use the high school
grades grades are all relative to
whatever High School yeah right you know
you're attending uh this is again where
if you use the data you could actually
show and build that trust with the data
so you know if the sap is biased in
favor of the Rich and it's over
predicting the performance of the rich
right we could correct that you know
well
we can point this out with the SAT too
so this has to be done on the racial
front because if the SAT was prejudiced
against black test takers it would under
predict their performance
and it doesn't it doesn't right and
that's a that's a killer statistic right
I mean it's quite the shock because now
you could say the only way to get around
that
on the systemic racism front is to say
as we alluded to earlier that the
performance criteria are just as
prejudiced as the admission criteria but
they would have to be exactly as
prejudiced it seems right right right
right which seems you know
extraordinarily extraordinarily unlikely
and you just roll it forward to the next
stage every time to say well then the
next place is exactly the same level of
racism as the previous stage you know
it's uh
it's crazy well I've you know the
conclusion I came to and this was a
painful conclusion in some ways it it
wasn't necessarily in accord with my
moral sentiments let's say is that we we
simply can't do better than actual race
and ethnicity blind objective tests of
predictive Merit and those should be
established those should be applied
uniformly and because that's the best
solution even though it still has its
flaws now I don't I still have no idea
what the consequence of that would be
given that the elite schools would
rapidly fill up with Asians maybe the
consequence would be that the other
relatively underperforming ethnic groups
including whites would pull up their
socks you know that's a possibility and
say well those people are obviously
doing something that we're doing right
that we're not doing that was my
reaction and I was looking at the
numbers thinking I want to know what
they what they're doing you know because
it's it's incredible yeah right right
there's a lesson to be learned there in
principle knowing what those best
practices are would be incredibly
helpful and I and I don't I don't have a
good sense of it yeah so what what has
been the consequence for you of being
involved in this line of research you
said there were protests about your work
in 2011. I guess you were lucky it was
2011 and not 2016 because it didn't take
you out and might have later so so what
have many people wondering how I
survived you know yeah well I'm curious
about continue exactly yeah yeah
and you know that whole experience
really prepared me to take the case it
was actually one of the most spiritual
moments you know of my life because when
people are protesting and you know
it just made me realize how much I care
what other people think about me you
know somebody writes an article from
some satellite state school in an ethnic
studies Department in the state of
Washington calling me a racist
that really hurt at the time yeah yeah
it's really hard on people you bet and
Phyllis you know a week or two of like
no sleep and then I woke up one morning
and I view it by Grace was free and felt
like I was able to love the people who
were coming after me and saying okay
you know I think they're missing to
everyone I'm saying I'm going to give
them the benefit of the doubt and
explain what I actually
what I actually mean and I think that
that I don't know whether that's been
what's
I'm sure the horrible stuff could still
happen to me
but um you know
if somebody gives I I can take a punch
and respond in love
uh with and I feel like um that might be
seen as wimping out but I don't feel
like I'm compromising on the truth you
know I'll try to go as far as I can to
meet them where they're at without
compromising on what I know
what I know to be true
um
and I think it makes a difference you
know I do
you know I try to treat people well in
my interpersonal relationships right
right right and that so you're not
you're not adding being generally
dislikable to the raft of sins that
might be utilized let's say to take you
down
so far that's right so far yes so far
right no kidding no kidding but I've
been Amazed maybe this podcast will
change all this but I've gotten zero
hate mail since the Supreme Court
decision okay so you made reference
earlier to the fact that this Supreme
Court decision
overturned a number of Lower Court
decisions and it's also the case that so
obviously the lower courts were
persuaded by evidence that wasn't the
same that as the evidence you were
bringing forward and it's also the case
that at the Supreme Court itself there
were other experts with the pedigree as
credible as yours let's say who don't
agree about the interpretation of the
data so if you had to make a case
against what you were offering as a
witness how would you make the case and
how did the people who were brought in
as experts make the case and what were
they claiming
so actually I would say they have a much
higher credit pedigree than I do you
know David card was one of them and soon
after the case he actually won a Nobel
Prize he was the one on the Harvard case
and Carolyn Hawks hoxby at Stanford was
my counterpart in the UNC case
well it's interesting to say I had the
benefit of working on both cases so I
could be reasonably consistent across
the two
they actually attacked me from other
sites
so uh card's opinion was that I needed
needed to control for more things and in
particular the personal rating was an
example and I you know I actually
estimated models of the personal rating
um showing the Asian bias
but uh the way he would argue it would
be we need to take sort of our Resort
for it that this is not uh a biased a
biased measure
so that was that was one aspect to it
the other aspect to it is right but you
showed it was a biased measure so so I
don't understand his claim exactly so
your your claim if I get it right is
that the prejudice against Asians so to
speak was making itself manifest as
invisible variables so in within the
so-called personal or personality
ratings now there are objective ways of
measuring personality which we could
also point out which are quite valid
right so Harvard could take that route
and they don't they they do uh
subjective evaluation but your point was
that well that was hiding as substantive
anti-asian bias so how do you how did
your opponents mustard muster an
argument against that so
um
it's very convoluted how you how you do
that because you don't actually look at
a model the personally any model of
personal rating shows that Asian
Americans suggests as well uh sorry on
the observables associated with the
personal rating
Asian Americans have observables that
are just as strong as whites or or
stronger and yet get worse personal
rates often with discrimination things
you're worried that oh every time I had
a variable the Discrimination goes down
what if I keep adding variables that it
it may go away
that's the amazing thing about this case
is with Asian Americans you put in more
variables it often goes up you know the
Discrimination because they're they're
stronger on those those measures
so in order to get there it's pretty
convoluted the first thing you have to
do is take those special groups the
athletes the legacies the children of
donors
and you have to to say that the
Discrimination has to be happening
against Asian apple applicants that are
there as well
it actually that turns out not to be the
case
so 98 of Asian American applicants
are not athletes legacies children
donors
uh the two percent that are they're not
being discriminated against there's not
not evidence of that I think that makes
sense so it's not pers okay so it's not
precisely Asian discrimination or if it
is it's not pervasive enough to cut
across all categories that's right and I
would say the same thing on affirmative
action so Zion Williamson was an amazing
Duke basketball player
he didn't benefit from racial
affirmative action he benefited because
he was an amazing new basketball player
you know when you're talking about those
things that's just not relevant you know
for a long time they would talk about
discrimination against black
quarterbacks we shouldn't be able to say
we're not discriminating against lineman
so therefore we're not discriminating
against
black quarterbacks that doesn't make any
sense
um so he's basically so all you can say
is that the Discrimination isn't
universally pervasive you could say that
some forms of discrimination Will trump
others that's right we discriminate
against the Asian Americans who don't
have those
connections to Harvard through the
Legacy and the recruited athletes
process
um so that was sort of how that that
case sort of worked and much of the
focus in the Harvard trial was all about
the Asian American discrimination I
actually don't think David Cardin and I
had very different things to say about
the racial preferences
I would say that it uh quadruples their
chance of getting admitted according to
cards results it would the
cancer being admitted for for black
applicants
what was interesting to UNC case is um
things operated very differently in
Harvard I wrote a report then card saw
my report and built off of that
in the UNC case we wrote simultaneous
reports
and then did that two more times
so our starting places were completely
different
and the other expert basically took the
position that
um
we can't really model Harvard's uh unc's
admissions because it's holistic you
know and that model sort of of
admissions failed to predict
um
predict the decisions well
now
I think that the criteria that she used
to evaluate that was nonsensical and
that if we started with me writing the
first report we wouldn't we wouldn't
have got to that position
but in this case you can just keep
doubling down doubling down
um I mean as an example you know her
criteria was based on What's called the
pseudo r squared
these are non-linear models so in r
squared in a linear model sort of tells
you how much of the variation the data
is explained
when you have a pseudo r squared it
doesn't really work that way in in quite
the same way you know
so one of the comments that was made was
a pseudo r squared of 0.5 means that we
get half the admissions decisions
correct
well that of course is nonsense right
because by flipping a coin I could get
half the decisions
right right right right correct you
really need to be looking at accuracy
and if you look at accuracy you know the
models would predict the correct
decision over 90 of the time
so it's uh
it was a very funny experience
um in the UNC case they basically
thought I didn't control for enough
things
sorry that I controlled for too many
things in the Harvard case they said I
didn't control burn up things
it it wasn't uh uh coherent okay so so
why do you think okay so okay fair
enough so why do you think that
your arguments so to speak or
the side of the cases that you were
testifying on behalf of why do you think
that that carried the day at the Supreme
Court level and not in relationship to
the lower courts and what do you think
of I mean the one of the response
patterns especially from the radical
types is that well you know the Supreme
Court is stacked with reprehensible
conservatives and of course that's how
they voted and that was why the
anti-affirmative action say uh Pro Merit
that's another way of looking outside
carried the day
what what's your sense of that I think
that you know I certainly came out of
those cases a bit cynical about the role
of this the statistics here you know
both judges at the lower court could
have called in a third expert
to say you know which one of us is right
but that would have limited their
ability to rule how they wanted to rule
so we it's funny how that works right
where we say well it's a conservative
Court they're going to rule however they
want to rule
based on the statistical evidence I feel
quite strongly that that was what
happens at the lower the lower court
case
and then you're left with a really bad
record you know in terms of what was
admitted uh as evidence and do you think
do well do you think you're
do you think that your political
affiliation how do you control for the
potential consequences of your political
affiliation which I don't know by the
way how do you control for the potential
consequences of your political
affiliation or viewpoint on the
outcome of the studies that you've been
running and the testimony that you
provide like how do you how do you
protect yourself against your own bias
well I'm very cautious on this front
partly because of that protest you know
so my burden of proof is you know I know
I can get in big trouble so I have to be
very careful
how I'm going to be talking about these
things and set a very high bar for
coming to particular conclusions I mean
I feel this way sort of in general like
right the cost is high that's right so
the evidence seems to be much better in
that regard yeah yeah yeah but my intent
was always to get peer-reviewed papers
out of this so I've published five
peer-reviewed Publications in good
economics kernels out of the case
and uh right on Asian American
discrimination I want to elaborate on
that for a second too because for
everyone who's watching and listening
it's like
the social science domain is
overwhelmingly tilted politically
towards the left that may be less true
for economics than it is for psychology
but it's true across the social sciences
and so what that means is that if you
publish a paper with so-called
conservative implications in a decent
peer-reviewed journal the probability
that it's robust is extremely high
because if there are any reasons to
thwart its progress forward those
reasons will make themselves manifest
I think that's right on and you could
really see it in my view with um you
know I published one paper on Legacy and
athlete preferences and another paper on
Asian American discrimination
the same commentator will trash the
Asian American discrimination one and
laud the Legacy and athlete one
and it's the same model right right it's
the same model right right right right
yeah and that and that was was actually
funny Harvard the evidence against
Harvard was so damning they had their
own internal research team
that had estimated models of Harvard's
Admissions and they found a big penalty
against Asian Americans
and Harvard's like oh well we don't know
what to do with that
but in that same model they found that
they were giving a bump to low-income
students
and they knew that that was true it's
the same model you can't interpret it
one way when you get the result you like
and another way when you get the result
you don't like you know it doesn't make
any sense and if anything based upon the
strength of the applicants
you should disbelieve the low income
result not the Asian American result
because all the observable factors are
pointing to Asian Americans being
stronger
they're probably stronger the
unobservable ones as well right right
okay okay so you protect yourself
against bias first of all just by fear
which is actually a good way of well
it's a good issue I used to tell my
students look guys you don't publish
Ed reproducible data
right to further your career well why
well do you want to study something that
doesn't exist for the rest of your life
that's stupid don't do that and you're
going to be motivated to do it because
it's hard to admit that a research
project was a failure you're going to
try to scrape something out of it so you
have to be careful but then the and so
that's another you know use of fear it's
like be careful because you'll convince
yourself of something that isn't true
and waste your life that's stupid your
situation is well if you say anything
even vaguely untoward or inaccurate
you're going to get slaughtered for it
and then and that's a fair that's a fair
protection and then also well if you
have to publish these in peer-reviewed
journals you're going to hit the
ideological Vanguard
um and and have to argue your way
through it and if you can do that well
obviously the data has to be so credible
that it can't be dismissed by people
with an ideological bent okay so that's
good so Harvard in the UNC and UNC were
uh
hit hard by this ruling practically and
I would say morally too they got
walloped how have they reacted and how
have other universities reacted well the
the public for uh reaction is to send
out emails how disappointed they are in
the Supreme Court decision how they're
going to abide it but our commitment to
diversity is unchanged
so I I think that they're going to try
to figure out
legal ways or illegal ways where they're
not going to get caught
to somehow put the preferences uh
preferences back in right right right
well that does that open them up on the
liability front now I mean they've been
told in no uncertain terms that they
can't do this anymore it's not this is
pretty black and white so it seems to me
that if Harvard continues to gerrymander
their admissions processes that they're
setting themselves up for a pretty
wall-upping fall I don't know what that
would mean on the liability front for
example I mean there was a class action
suit at one point right yeah and it but
it really wasn't about getting damages
so much as changing the system but I
think Harvard would have a very hard
time because they just went through a
whole trial of thing saying that we need
to explicitly consider race in order to
get these levels of diversity
if they somehow kept the same levels of
diversity now
then when they're supposed to not being
explicitly considering race that it
shows they must be kidding somehow in
order to in order to get there
so you almost have to see a drop
um uh or the whole record in their case
was was off right right okay okay now
how do you think that universities
should select in the aftermath of this
decision well I think they should select
just based on test scores
but even within tests just with
objective tests yeah I mean
the problem is is that the SAT for a
place like Harvard doesn't test at a
high enough level we actually need to go
the Test's like getting the college in
Chile are at a much higher level than
what what we have uh in the U.S right so
they should refine them and and make
them more demanding so they can
discriminate so listen for everybody
watching and listening you know imagine
that you get people who score
95th percentile on the SAT and people
who scored 99th percentile and you might
think well you know what what the hell's
the difference and the difference is
this if if you score at the 95th
percentile you're the smartest person in
a room full of 20 people and if you
score at the 99th percentile you're the
smartest person in a room full of 100
people and then the difference is just
as big from 99 to 99.9 it's one in a
hundred versus one in a thousand and so
forth all the way up the scale and
there's no indication that I can see in
the psychometric literature that that
ever stops being relevant and so it is
import important to differentiate at
that upper end you know and so I mean
we've put together models to predict
academic performance and you can predict
academic performance quite accurately
with
um General cognitive ability and trait
conscientiousness and then low
neuroticism helps and if you're looking
to expand on the creative front you
could you could look at measures of
creative ability and there are good
measures and you can look at performance
and and and you can make a formal model
where you specify exactly what weight
you put on all of those variables
and you can easily test that against
actual University performance which is
what you had recommended earlier yeah I
mean clearly for math you want to put
more weight
on your math background uh maybe less so
in English that's not taken into account
at all but I think those tests right now
are too easy let that distinction at
that top level could be like I just made
a stupid mistake that's too bad you
really want to test much deeper you bet
you bet yeah okay okay now we just
outlayed outlined how
University should select this is how
businesses should select too by the way
and there's huge economic advantage in
doing that by the way like if you don't
have to increase your ability to select
top people very much to benefit in a
staggering manner from the consequence
of that Improvement I tried to convince
corporations of this for like 15 years I
went on the road to sell to you to
corporations which turned out to be
absolutely 100 percent impossible that's
when I first ran into HR departments by
the way and that was back in you know
the early 2000s but
um
we talked about how the universities
should select in the aftermath of the
decision the the lurking question is how
will they I saw UC Davis for example at
the medical school they're trying to
produce an adversity quotient which I
think is just an absolutely
catastrophically Dreadful idea I mean I
can understand why they're doing it but
God that's a dismal contest right to
match your misery against someone else's
and to try to rank order you know who
had the hardest lot I mean
okay that's it well and it's so proud of
the political adjudicate man it's so
prone to political as well that
adversity I experience
at a pro-life uh rally where people are
harassing me I don't think that's going
to sell
you know fundamentally right yeah it
introduces ideological conformity
which um yeah I think a real outstanding
question is does somebody like a Roland
Friar bring more or less diversity
well you know he's not a progressive
black not a progressive to me that in
some sense brings War diversity we want
to we don't want it to be the case that
the conservatives are all whites you
know
uh yeah but that's not really how I
think it's seen
um I think it's just gonna end up being
yeah well the thing I think the whole
the whole diversity shibboleth is a
front for posers to attain status they
don't deserve fundamentally because I
don't think you can do better than Merit
to find the way we already define
marriage which is you're a meritorious
candidate if you're the features you
bring to the position match the desired
outcome of performance in the position
and
fundamentally as as we we also pointed
out earlier you're actually Bound by law
to do that especially if you're an
employer you know now the law is tricky
because it it contains
self-contradictory aspects but it's a
one counter example for that you know
there's a guy that passes so far
University of Michigan he does amazing
work in my mind and he's from he's a
Muslim from Pakistan
and he's able to go to these madrasas
these fundamentalist schools and
interview them and get get data
to me that's actually that's the kind of
diversity that I think is good in the
sense it actually he's opening up these
new areas of research that
there's no way the Madras would ever
give me data so there might be some but
it's a limited scope for for you know
getting uh certain questions answered
that you might argue that you could
argue that as a form of competence like
if you were going to hire someone and
the person said look one of the things I
bring to this position is that I have
access to uh an ethnic group say or an
anthropological group that another
candidate will have I mean I I and I do
think that that is actually a a measure
of Merit and could and could could be
put put under that rubric yeah the key
is not to have that measure of Merit
just be because I'm a particular race
right because that that's effectively
how it's argued now
um is
that by your race that gives you that
you you do marriage it uh because you've
got a unique insight into the into that
Community right right well and that's
also a strange that's also a strange
claim too right is that merely because
you have a very what would you say
low resolution
um feature that you're somehow an emblem
standard barrier Bearer for that group
you know like I've never thought of
myself as a representative of the white
community
you know it's Preposterous because well
first of all it's Preposterous because
we know as
researchers into individual differences
that the differences within any give
given ethnic or racial group are much
larger than the differences between
groups right which is actually the
canonical non-racist statement right
within group variance trumps between
group variants it even does that between
men and women in in almost all domains
in fact I don't know of a single domain
where that's not true even in interest
where men and women differ most widely
the difference is one standard deviation
there's still way more variance within
the group than there is between the
groups so so how do you think the
universities will respond
we said how they should respond well how
will they respond well I'm hoping it
will be a heterogeneous response I think
some schools will go the UC route and
get rid of the test scores and they'll
do other things like diversity
statements and such I'm hoping that
other schools will focus more on you
know addressing some of the pipeline
issues I think you will see a big
movement against legacy admissions
um I was surprised at actually how
quickly that happened
um so I think that sort of stuff is is
is going to go
to me I'm you know what I'm really
pushing for is for them to use their
data to be able to say look I can tell
you that you're going to really succeed
here you know and we've set up our
program so that you can succeed here
because the competition for those
students is going to be fierce well
right so what a university could do you
know hypothetically imagine that they
set up actually rigorous objective
testing models so a university could say
to a given candidate
your probability of succeeding in this
discipline here is X percent
and so that would mean that qualified
students could look at a range of
universities and they could say for
example if they were slightly lower
performing on the academic front what
we're interested in Sciences they can
pick a university where they had a say a
70 chance of graduating and so then
they'd know that if they worked
they could pick the university that was
the most challenging that would give
them some reasonable opportunity of
success right that'd be a good deal
right because there's a very wide range
of universities and objective testing
could establish that across time and you
can see that happening in a state like
Florida you know where the governor said
you know uh some of the red States could
move towards that model for their state
system at least so that that's where I
think the the best path forward is I
think there are other ways to you know
the whole tie to all this in terms of
racial preferences was losing your
government funding
obviously on the admissions front you're
sort of stuck there but if you look at
how these um the way we're paying
college athletes now you could either
easily have a separate organization that
was sort of we're giving scholarships to
black students who attend Duke
you know they're not tied with the
government funding you can see like a
huge competition emerging for that where
things happen more on the financial aid
side not associated with the university
so there's no scope to saying that it's
illegal because the organization's not
there right right you see any downside
to that
um
I'd have to think more about that I mean
to me that's the market there's no
they're not obvious yeah yeah yeah yeah
it's not there's no there's no downsides
that leap obviously to mind so now is
there anything else that we we're
running out of time here on the YouTube
side I'm going to flip over to the Daily
wire side for everyone watching and
listening and and uh talk to Peter a bit
more about how his interest in this
domain and in economics in general made
itself manifest so you could you're
welcome to join us there if you're
inclined to is there anything else that
we didn't cover today
in relationship to the Supreme Court
decision and and in relationship to
affirmative action it's complexities oh
I I know what I know we include with
perhaps
you've spent a lot of time
studying affirmative action
do you have
what would you say
in relationship to its putative
advantages
has it has there been any manner in
which affirmative action has actually
been
a policy success well it certainly has
increased the share of minority students
at top schools
and I think those when as applicants are
graduates even as graduates because I
think at places like Harvard now they
will graduate great year they will
graduate you
so that's always been sort of the gamble
right that by yes there might be these
costs associated with it but by getting
them to Harvard
um great things are going to happen
later on in society you know and that's
you know we they'll they'll be the
Supreme Court Justices to get to those
very top of the top positions
um
that would be the argument uh to me
that's a little stoppish but
uh but I understand the argument do you
and do you think there's any Merit to
that argument I mean you see my the
counter argument would be
giving less qualified people a pedigree
that indicates their qualifications and
then putting them in ever more important
situations that they're not qualified
for is not a net good right that's a
rough argument to make and I I wouldn't
necessarily say I'm making that argument
but that is the counter argument that's
right so
um on the one hand we our Supreme Court
is more diverse because of affirmative
action
on the other hand
I think that that is you know Clarence
Thomas would say that send him a serious
disservice because of being viewed that
way and you don't know
and that's that's the problem right is
uh you know yeah well that's one of the
really ugly things about affirmative
action as far as I'm concerned is that
it it the question is then begged and
that's not good and that's particularly
hard on people who are truly qualified
right because what a bloody catastrophe
that is to have to face that additional
level of Doubt like who are you really
Jesus brutal brutal I mean you take
something like Glenn Lowry I think
you've had on
he's one of the most brilliant people
I've ever met you know I think he's just
fantastic
and yet he had to endure
all of that you know
um yeah
yeah that isn't something you'd wish on
your worst enemy that's for sure to have
your genuine competence in question yeah
all right well I guess
we should wrap up on this side so as I
said to everyone watching and listening
I'm going to talk to Peter at some
additional length on The Daily wire plus
platform about the development of his
career and his interests and so if you
want to join us there then you'd be more
than welcome to do so
um it's not a bad time to funnel some
support the daily wire way by the way
because YouTube for example has been
pretty
um assiduously at war with the daily
wire contributors over the last month
three of my podcasts have been taken
down and I suspect there's more in the
pipeline that will suffer the same fate
and that's not good and the other people
who are using YouTube on The Daily wire
side have been hit harder than me by
quite a substantial margin so if you're
ever thinking about
subscribing to the Daily wire platform
this isn't such a bad time to do it
let's say on the moral front in any case
you can give that some consideration
thank you to the film crew here in
Manhattan today for making this a
pleasant experience and technically
feasible and to the Daily wear Plus for
facilitating the conversation Peter
thank you very much for talking to me
today and for
um very much well your efforts on the
research front you bet man good good to
see you
ciao everybody till next time
[Music]